Computational Analysis in RStudio for Beginners: Analyzing Ukrainian
Folklore
================

# Course Overview

Welcome to the **“Computational Analysis in RStudio for Beginners:
Analyzing Ukrainian Folklore”** course! This course is designed for
students interested in computational text analysis in the context of
Ukrainian folklore studies. Over a series of seminars, students will
learn how to use the R programming language to analyze textual data,
focusing on the rhythmic, phonetic, and structural aspects of Ukrainian
folk songs. The course covers a wide range of topics, including data
preprocessing, rhyme pattern recognition, parts-of-speech tagging, and
visualization techniques such as bar charts and word clouds. By the end
of the course, students will be equipped to conduct their own research
in digital humanities.

## Course Background

This curriculum was created at the Estonian Literary Museum during the
project MOB3JD1218 “Traditional Estonian and Ukrainian Folksongs:
Comparative Corpus-Based Computational Analysis.”

## Content Structure

The repository is organized into the following structure:

- `seminar_1/` to `seminar_11/`: Each folder contains R code files and
  datasets required for the respective seminar session.
- `list_of_students_1UA.docx`: List of students enrolled in Group 1.
- `list_of_students_1UF.docx`: List of students enrolled in Group 2.

## Seminar Breakdown

Below is a breakdown of each seminar session and what it covers:

### Seminar 1: Introduction to R - Basic Calculations and Data Exploration

**Topics Covered:** - Basics of R syntax and arithmetic operations -
Working with variables and Boolean expressions - Basic data exploration
techniques using a sample dataset

**Learning Outcomes:** - Understand R programming fundamentals. -
Perform basic calculations and explore datasets.

### Seminar 2-3: Data Manipulation and Visualization

**Topics Covered:** - Processing textual data to identify and analyze
stanza structures in folk ballads. - Using R packages (`tidyverse`,
`writexl`) for data cleaning, calculations, and visualization. -
Exporting processed data to Excel and visualizing stanza lengths using
`ggplot2`.

**Learning Outcomes:** - Manipulate and visualize textual data. - Export
data and create visual representations.

### Seminar 4: Counting Syllables in Text Data

**Topics Covered:** - Text analysis to count syllables in lines of
Ukrainian ballads. - Data manipulation, custom function creation, and
visualization. - Exporting processed data and summaries to Excel.

**Learning Outcomes:** - Develop custom functions for text analysis. -
Visualize syllable distributions.

### Seminar 5: Sentiment Analysis of Ukrainian Ballads

**Topics Covered:** - Sentiment analysis using `quanteda`, `tidytext`,
and other libraries. - Visualizing sentiment scores and conducting
polarity analysis.

**Learning Outcomes:** - Set up and apply sentiment analysis in R. -
Interpret and visualize sentiment results.

### Seminar 6: Sentiment Analysis and Word Cloud Visualization

**Topics Covered:** - Deep dive into dictionary-based and supervised
sentiment analysis methods. - Creating word clouds and polarity plots
for visual representation.

**Learning Outcomes:** - Conduct in-depth sentiment analysis. - Create
advanced visualizations to represent text data.

### Seminar 7: Advanced Text Analysis Techniques with Quanteda

**Topics Covered:** - Using `quanteda` for keyword analysis, text
visualization, and document-feature matrices. - Managing stopwords,
tokenizing text, and trimming features.

**Learning Outcomes:** - Prepare and manipulate text data for advanced
analysis. - Perform keyword analysis using Keywords in Context (KWIC).

### Seminar 8: Text Analysis of Ukrainian Folk Songs: Vocatives, Semantic Groups, and Genre Statistics

**Topics Covered:** - Textual data processing, including counting and
visualizing vocatives, tokenization, POS tagging, semantic grouping, and
genre statistics.

**Learning Outcomes:** - Analyze the linguistic structure and
genre-specific characteristics of folk songs. - Use various
visualization techniques (bar charts, scatter plots) to represent
textual patterns.

### Seminar 9: Analyzing Rhyme Patterns in Ukrainian Ballads

**Topics Covered:** - Analyzing rhyme types (masculine, feminine or
dactylic rhyme) using custom functions to convert vowel patterns into
stressed/unstressed formulas. - Visualizing rhyme types using bar plots
and treemaps.

**Learning Outcomes:** - Understand and classify rhyme types in poetic
texts. - Visualize the distribution of rhyme types.

### Seminar 10: Rhyming and POS Analysis

**Topics Covered:** - Finals and rhyming analysis, POS tagging (using
the UDPipe model for Ukrainian), and frequency analysis.

**Learning Outcomes:** - Perform phonetic and syntactic analysis of
Ukrainian texts. - Visualize and interpret POS frequencies and rhyming
patterns.

### Seminar 11: Color Semantics and Contextual Analysis

**Topics Covered:** - Detecting colors in texts, analyzing contextual
POS combinations, and visualizing color distributions. - Advanced tasks
on contextual analysis around color words using UDPipe.

**Learning Outcomes:** - Conduct contextual analysis and visualize
linguistic patterns. - Understand color semantics and their usage in
folk songs.

## Homework Assignments

- Each seminar includes a practical homework task that reinforces the
  topics covered.
- The tasks involve applying the learned techniques to new datasets,
  comparing results, and providing insights.

## License

This repository is licensed under the MIT License. You are free to use,
modify, and distribute the content with proper attribution.
